Welcome to Slash Forward. In this episode
we’re going to keep things simple and,
perhaps, intimate as we look at a little indie
film with only six characters and one primary
location. It’s a straightforward film about
a couple who kidnaps another couple and get
themselves stranded in a service station
while attempting to avoid a predatory mold
that absorbs our nutrients and takes over and
reforms biological material. Of course you must
realize I’m describing the 2008 creature
feature Splinter. How could you survive an
attack from a semi-sentient fungus that can take
you over slowly from a single prick, or through
directly attacking you as amalgamation of various
parts and pieces that used to be your friends.
We’re about to go on a journey with a quartet of
fine people who are forced to struggle with just
that question. Let me know if you’ve seen this one
and what you thought in the comments below. And if
you like any part of this video, hitting the like
button would help me out a lot. Let’s get to it.
We open at a Sherman service
station somewhere out in BFE.
The clerk’s having a lazy afternoon and
settles into his lawn chair for some relaxin,
which is hard to do with your back to the
wilderness. A noise attracts his attention,
but he’s no fool - he approaches cautiously, but
gets his lower extremities shredded nonetheless.
As he suffers we get little bits of a driving
scene where we can almost make out what’s
happening, before the sports ute enters the
perimeter of one of those old experimental
extraction sites owned by the oil companies.
While I’m sure this was marked on the map,
they still pull about twenty feet off of
a nearby service road to post up for (what
basically equates to camping in their backyard)
some bunny hill camping. After giving Seth wood,
he and Polly almost immediately get
to rolling around in the wild grasses.
Meanwhile, Dennis and his girl Lacey find
their engine destroyed while on their way to
Mexico. Determined to salvage the weekend,
Dennis insists they get out and walk it.
At the campsite the tent almost makes Seth
give in and head out to the nearest motel. But
it is their anniversary and Polly desires to
make love in the moonlight. So they soldier on,
but end up destroying their only tent,
which now severely limits their options.
Not a man to travel heavy, D chucks their
belongings into the woods so they can move
swiftly. Lacey is upset with this turn of events,
but D wins her over with some classic
little pet names. Always the gentleman,
he even makes sure she’s nice and warm,
even though his shirt is fully saturated.
On their way back to civilization, Seth hits his
lady with some anniversary fun facts about nature
But do you know if they’re known for harboring
an ancient evil? As they head down the old dusty
trail, and make jokes about the gnarly and sticky
motel room that is likely in store for them, they
run past Lacey and decide to stop. Unfortunately,
she was honey potting the young couple and as a
result of their indecision, D is able to sneak
up on them and take control of the vehicle.
While they initially needed a ride, D also
reveals the amended plan is to hold them until
the banks open in the morning so they can get some
spending cash before heading to their destination.
As they settle into the situation, Lacey is
stricken by a bout of unseasonable shivers.
As D tosses the phones and searches their
wallets, we find out that Seth is a PhD
student. When Lacey perks up and inquires if
he has yet been entrusted with writing scripts,
her affliction comes into focus. Unfortunately
for, well, everybody really, Seth is a biologist.
They travel into the night, but have to stop
after hitting something in the road. Then they
file out to change the flat while the truck
takes a relaxing piss all over the asphalt.
Lacey thought the animal looked like her dead
pet Ginger. Despite the low likelihood of this
scenario, she goes back to check it out.
Distraught, she attempts to compel Seth to
use his biology PhD to help her despite the fact
that Ginger is now just a wet spot on the road.
Back at the truck D gets a
wicked splinter in his finger,
but he’s a hard man so he just
pulls it out and keeps rolling.
With limited options available to him, Seth
resorts to wishing Ginger alive and sure
enough her remains become agitated. When they get
snapped at, Lacey fires on the cat flap and runs.
In the confusion they all pile into the car and
drive at Lacey’s insistence. When they reach a
safe distance she explains what happened, but D
reassures her that Ginger is dead and suggests
that this may be a byproduct of her coming down
off the red dragon, if you know what I’m saying.
As he continues to reassure her, the engine
temperature rises, risking a warped head. So
they pull off at a nearby service station that’s
familiar to us. Lacey heads to the bathroom and
D has Seth fuel up - after reminding him who
the big man is. Then he and Polly go inside to
get some coolant. They find it to be strangely
quiet as everyone goes about their business. D
attempts to check out, but can’t raise the clerk.
But Lacey finds him in the bathroom, begging for
death. She runs up front to warn everyone of the
danger, and luckily she’s an expert communicator.
She’s vindicated, however, when a man with spikes
comes around the corner and menaces them in short,
wonky movements. Despite her early adoption of
the danger aesthetic, Lacey gets spiked up while
Seth and the others lock themselves inside.
D takes a moment to mourn for his lost love,
but also reminds them that they’re still
kidnapped. Things settle down after a few minutes,
so D snaps back into action - stocking up on phone
cord, cigarettes and cash. When he goes to erase
some evidence, he notices Lacey moving outside.
But with only 15 pixels demonstrating this,
he feels the need to venture out and
confirm it. As he prepares to do so,
he makes Seth and Polly pinky promise that
they won’t leverage this to their advantage.
He proceeds with extreme caution, staying
low just in case there’s a sniper nearby.
The spines tingle upon the approach of fresh
meat, and he drags her back to the station,
face down of course. When things
start happening, Polly locks the door.
Cowardly Seth, however, doesn’t want to
stir the pot, and the end result has them
locked back in the store with a new friend
in the form of Lacey’s disembodied hand.
Seth is interested in its biology, but
D treats it like a giant spider. But
Seth’s boundless curiosity gets the best
of him and he studies it further - watching
as it absorbs nutrients from nearby fluids
like some sort of mold or fungus. The hand
eventually stops, but the rest of Lacey’s body
is famished and it thirsts for their fluids.
They attempt to escape out the back door, but
don’t have a key. Seth goes back up front to
search for one, but is coming up empty when
D suggests they pop the hinges. So Seth comes
back with a screwdriver and they begin to remove
the door as D recounts all of his now irrelevant
hopes and dreams. Unfortunately, a second
layer of security confounds their efforts.
Curiously, the banging stops, and they hear
the creature shuffling around on the roof.
It’s then discovered that this was caused
by the arrival of the local Sheriff.
They try really hard to convince her to call for
backup, but to also be careful and do so from the
safety of her vehicle. They eventually reach
a compromise Well, that’s something, I guess.
As she raises HQ on her radio, she gets some
splinters dropped on her grill before being
descended upon and ripped in half. At this point,
even grizzled Dennis chucks his lunch in the
corner. Afterward, they all take a moment to fall
into an infinitely deep pit of despair. Meanwhile,
topside, the creature reconstitutes the officer’s
torso to configure itself into version 2.0.
During the next lull, we’re reminded of D’s
dirty little secret as Polly and Seth argue
over whether they should make for the cruiser
or trust that help is now on the way. Then,
a third option - they can create a trail of
flammable liquid from the back door to the forest,
light it on fire and wait for the firemen to come
rescue them with their barrel chests
and burly arms. Seth is not on board,
but in the absence of viable options they tell
him to take a breather while they get to work.
But then they hear the crackle of Sheriff
Frankel’s radio and see that it’s just outside
the exterior pay station. Seth immediately
fashions a device to try to hook it in.
D attempts to help him add to it, reminding
us of the creeping dread consuming his hand.
Seth fiddles a bit, but eventually snags the cord
and slowly draws it in and juuuust over the edge.
But the creature drops in to dispute ownership
since it is comprised of the Sheriff’s torso.
It attempts to get in but can do little more
than bleed all over the floor with it’s weak,
squishy human parts. However, this does
present as an enticing snack for several
pieces now inside the building. After they
repel it, Seth and Polly realize suddenly that
there is a conspicuous absence of D. But they’re
distracted from this by another autonomous hand,
which they manage to hold off because, really,
it shouldn’t be that strong to begin with.
D then pops out from behind the OJ to warn
them to avoid splinters and invite them into
his sweet cooler clubhouse. Once inside,
the hand just sort of forgets about them.
As they reconvene, the moment is punctuated
by his affliction completely ravaging his arm.
Noooowwww he decides it’s an appropriate time
to try to stop the spread. He calls for a knife,
but then passes out. But it’s all good,
because Seth finally steps up to do him a solid
fairplay. But with only a boxcutter surely
the bone will pose a - oh, well, okay then.
When he wakes up he is forced to give Seth his
props for lopping off his traitorous appendage.
Now feeling high after the adrenal dump, he
opens up a bit to share some of his motivations.
He wasn’t actually going to Mexico. He
was trying to get back to his nest egg
to gift it to the widow of the man he
killed in a robbery that went sideways.
Saddled with medical bills, she
eventually went bankrupt and he
had been trying to help support her while
he did his stretch in the penitentiary.
The introspective mood leads Seth to a
hypothesis that temperature may be a factor
in this situation. He needs to check something
first, though, so they all creep out of the
safety of the cooler to corner themselves behind
the counter. Upon review of the security tape Seth
posits that this simple organism just wanders
around, following the warmest object nearby
hoping that it’s food. It didn’t come for
him at first, because he was protected by the
heat of the engine. If they can stay below the
ambient temperature they would be invisible to
the creature. Since a hypothesis means nothing
without proper experimentation to back it up,
he goes into a zenlike state and
attempts to induce hypothermia.
Since the outside temp is 92 degrees, he
waits until he drops sufficiently below
that to give him some time to get to the
car. The others toss some hot-ass fireworks
out the back door for a distraction and,
once the creature shows up, Seth staggers
out the front hoping he can get there without
warming up too much. But, ya boi is struggling.
Bad news when they set off a fresh one and the
splinter monster seems disinterested. Because
when Seth gets to the car there are no keys,
the radio is off, and he can’t help but to be
hot - attracting the monster’s attention. D tries
to regain control by throwing a firework into the
front lot, but the creature is not attracted to
the hottest thing around anymore and it bursts
into the store with them. Despite it being
a fair 2v2, they duck back into the cooler.
Seth tries to unlock a shotgun, nearly blowing
his face off, and then we’re reminded that
there was a puddle of lighter fluid out
back. As the building goes up in flames,
Seth tries to distract it and they recognize
that they have to get it into the fire.
Seeking redemption Dennis gets up close and
personal, firing some shots and taking some
splinters before blasting the diesel into a
cleansing fireball. Seth and Polly return to
him. However, recognizing that he’s done
for, he turns over the widow’s address
and instructions for accessing his cache
of cash. Then they walk off as he ensures
there is nothing left behind. As Seth and Polly
wander toward the horizon, comforted in leaving
the danger behind them, we see that the danger is
simply awaiting a new host upon whom it can feed.
Much like in the movie itself, Splinter -
the movie itself - started small and seems
to have built up a loyal following over time. Any
acclaim is well deserved. It has a very sharp and
effective narrative wrapped up in a sort of a
little baby movie at just over eighty minutes
long. But they spent the money in the right
places, utilizing mostly practical effects and
using them sparingly, but with intensity. Taking
an excellent creature design and incorporating
it into a simple set up that focuses on
tension and character development is a
winning combination. This is essentially the same
recipe that was later used for Attack the Block,
another good example that puts these principles to
work. I’d love to hear your thoughts on the movie
in the comments below. Did you catch this one, or
did it fly under your radar? If you can find it,
the short time commitment makes it an easy watch
even if you’re not sure it’s your type of thing.
Before we go, I’d like to give a huge thanks to
my donors, memorialized in the hall of headshots.
I have a website set up where you can
support the channel through donations or
merch. Any donation unlocks uncensored movie
reviews of Lifeforce and Under the Skin,
with others to be added over
time. If you enjoyed the video,
I’d love for you to become a part of the
channel by subscribing. Thanks for watching.